OVERVIEW

The flight control system is a fly-by-wire system. The flight control surfaces are:

‐ Electrically controlled

‐ Hydraulically actuated.

The surfaces are actuated by one or both hydraulic systems, or by an independent hydraulic source
(EHA/EBHA).Refer to DSC-27-10-10 EHA / EBHA. Note: The slats also have an electrical motor. L1 The
stabilizer has two electric motors. The PF uses the sidestick to manually fly the aircraft. The
flight control computers interpret the pilot's inputs, and order flight control surface movement, as
necessary. Additionally, a PITCH TRIM sw and a RUDDER TRIM selector (with a rudder trim RESET pb)
enable the pilot to trim the aircraft when needed. In normal law, regardless of the pilot's input,
the flight control computers prevent excessive maneuvers and any exceedance of the safe envelope in
pitch, roll and yaw.

ARCHITECTURE

Flight Controls Architecture

CONTROL SURFACES

Control surfaces Pitch control uses:

‐ Two elevators

‐ The Trimmable Horizontal Stabilizer (THS)

Roll control uses:

‐ 4 ailerons

‐ 10 spoilers

Yaw control uses:

‐ One rudder

The speed brake and ground spoiler functions use:

‐ 14 spoilers

Lift augmentation uses:

‐ 14 slats

‐ 4 flaps

‐ 4 ailerons

For more information : Refer to Slats/Flaps Overview.

FLIGHT CONTROL COMPUTERS

Six flight control computers process pilot and autopilot inputs:

‐ 3 PRIMs

‐ 3 SECs

One computer of any type (PRIM or SEC) is able to control the aircraft and ensure safe flight and
landing. L2 In normal operation, one PRIM computer is the master (usually PRIM 1) and computes the
orders. The master computer sends orders to the other computers (PRIMs and SECs) which execute them
on their associated actuators. Each flight control actuator is connected to one PRIM and one SEC. In
normal operation, the PRIMs control the actuators. In the case of impossibility for the PRIM to
control its actuators, the associated SEC takes over. PRIM 1 Master If PRIM 1 fails, PRIM 2 becomes
the master. If PRIM 2 fails, PRIM 3 becomes the master.

PRIM 2 Master If all PRIMs are lost, all the operative SECs compute and perform their orders
independently. There is no master SEC. All PRIMs failed

FLIGHT CONTROL SYSTEM

System Architecture

PRIM

The three PRIMs:

‐ Compute Normal, Alternate, and Direct control laws

‐ Command the flight control surfaces : ailerons, spoilers, elevators, THS and rudder

‐ Compute the Load Alleviation Function (LAF) law

‐ Host the autopilot, flight director and autothrust functions. For more information, Refer to
  Flight

‐ Host the flight envelope protection functions

‐ Compute the characteristic speeds

‐ Host various other functions, described in their relevant chapters, out of which:

‐ Brake to Vacate (BTV). For more information, Refer to BTV.

‐ ROW and ROP functions. For more information, Refer to ROW/ROP.

‐ The inhibition function of the thrust reversers (Third line of defense). For more information:

Refer to DSC-70-10-70-20 Three Lines of Defense L2 The PRIMs receive information from the following
aircraft systems.

ADIRU

Each PRIM receives data from the three Air Data and Inertial Reference Units (ADIRUs). L3 Each ADIRU
has two parts:

‐ The Air Data Reference (ADR)

‐ The Inertial Reference (IR)

When the three IR (ADR) are valid, the used parameter is the median value. When two IR (ADR) are
valid, the used parameter is the average of both outputs. When only one IR is valid, its data is not
used. When only one ADR is valid, its parameters are used, if monitored by the ISIS. In addition, a
fourth AOA is used by the PRIMs in order to:

‐ Monitor the remaining MFPs in the case of an ADR failure

‐ Provide additional AOA data order to increase the availability of the flight control laws

‐ For more information: Refer to DSC-34-NAV-20-10-20 Architecture

ISIS

There is one Integrated Standby Instrument System (ISIS). The ISIS uses probes which are independent
from the ADIRUs probes. Each PRIM receives data from the ISIS to monitor the ADIRUs. For more
information:Refer to DSC-34-NAV-20-10-50 ADIRS Monitoring. The PRIMs do not use data from the ISIS
to compute flight control laws.

RA

Each PRIM receives data from the three Radio Altimeters (RAs). L3 Each PRIM is connected to two RAs
and receives third RA data via the other PRIMs. When the three RAs are valid, the used parameter is
the median value. When two RAs are valid, the used parameter is the average of both outputs. When
only one RA is valid, its value is used.

FQMS

The Fuel Quantity and Monitoring System (FQMS) provides the weight and centre of gravity data to the
PRIMs. L3 FQMS 1 sends the weight and CG information to the PRIMs. FQMS 2 takes over if FQMS 1
fails.

LGERS / BCS

The Landing Gear Extension Retraction System (LGERS) provides:

‐ Compressed/not compressed landing gear information

‐ Extended/retracted landing gear information

‐ L/G lever position.

The Braking Control System (BCS) provides:

‐ Wheel speed information

‐ Brake pedals position.

SFCC

The Slats and Flaps Control Computers provide the slats and flaps position, and FLAPS lever
position. For more information: Refer to DSC-27-20-10 Slat(Flap) Systems L3 Any SFCC can provide the
position of all the slats and flaps.

ACCELEROMETERS AND GYROMETERS

Several Rate Gyrometer and Accelerometer Units (RGAU) provide information for the computation of the
flight control laws:

‐ Roll rate

‐ Pitch rate

‐ Yaw rate

‐ Longitudinal acceleration

‐ Lateral acceleration

‐ Normal acceleration.

HYDRAULIC SENSORS

The hydraulic sensors provide the status of the hydraulic systems and engine driven pumps. This
enables flight control reconfiguration in case of hydraulic low pressure, or if only one pump
remains available for one system.

SEC

The three SECs:

‐ Compute the direct control law when the three PRIMs are failed,

‐ Control surfaces (ailerons, spoilers, elevators, THS and rudders) in backup to the PRIMs,

‐ Control the rudder trim (SEC 2 and SEC 3 only).

The SECs receive the same information as the PRIMs from the following systems:

‐ ADIRU

Each SEC receives data from two ADIRUs:

• SEC 1 receives data from ADIRUs 1 & 2. In addition SEC 1 receives data from ADIRU 3 via

SEC 2 and SEC 3

• SEC 2 receives data from ADIRUs 2 & 3

• SEC 3 receives data from ADIRUs 1 & 3.

‐ SFCC

‐ LGERS

‐ FQMS

‐ RA

‐ BCS

‐ Hydraulic sensors.

The direct law, hosted by the SECs, is more simple than the normal and alternate laws, and requires
less parameters. Therefore, the SECs are less affected by other aircraft system failures. For more
information: Refer to DSC-27-10-40 Direct Law

FLIGHT CONTROL DATA CONCENTRATOR (FCDC)

The two FCDCs acquire data from the PRIMs and SECs for:

‐ The F/CTL system display

‐ The Flight Warning System

‐ The on-board maintenance system

‐ The flight data recorders

‐ Weight and Balance Backup Computation (WBBC) which provides backup weight and CG data. L3 The data
  from the WBBC is used for flight control law and characteristic speed computation in case of a
  dual FQMS failure, and to detect any major discrepancy between the FQMS and the WBBC. For more
  information on the WBBC: Refer to DSC-28-10 Weight and Balance Backup

The FCDCs are hosted in the CPIOM-J7 (J71 and J72). For more information: Refer to DSC-42-10 CPIOM
Group J7

BACKUP CONTROL MODULE (BCM)

In the event of the temporary loss of all flight computers (PRIMs and SECs), the Backup Control
Module (BCM) provides aircraft control and stability. For more information : Refer to DSC-27-10-40

Backup Control.

PEDAL FEEL AND TRIM UNIT (PFTU)

The PFTU has two motors (one controlled by SEC 3, the other controlled by SEC 2) to move the zero-
force position of the rudder pedals:

‐ For rudder trim, in manual flight

‐ To reflect autopilot rudder trim orders, when the autopilot is engaged.

The autopilot rudder trim orders are sent from the PRIM to the PFTU, via the SEC.

EHA / EBHA

On most civil aircraft, there are at least three hydraulic systems, to ensure sufficient redundancy
for flight controls and landing gear systems. On the A350, to reduce the aircraft weight and
maintenance costs, there are only two hydraulic systems. Equivalent redundancy is achieved with
electro-hydraulic actuators. Electro-hydraulic actuators use electrical power to locally generate
their own hydraulic pressure to move a flight control surface. Each electro-hydraulic actuator has
its own self-contained hydraulic reservoir. There are two types of electro-hydraulic actuators:

‐ Electro-Hydrostatic Actuators (EHA) : Powered by one electric system

‐ Electrical Backup Hydraulic Actuators (EBHA) : Powered by one electric or one hydraulic

system.

EHA / EBHA

ELECTRO-HYDROSTATIC ACTUATOR (EHA)

Each surface has one, two, or three actuators. When EHAs are installed, they are the backup to the
conventional actuator. Each EHA has:

‐ Its own hydraulic reservoir

‐ An electric hydraulic pump

‐ A hydraulic actuator.

On ground, when hydraulic power is available, the reservoir of the EHA is automatically refilled, if
needed. The hydraulic fluid is taken from the hydraulic systems (green or yellow).

The following surfaces are fitted with an EHA:

‐ Inner ailerons,

‐ Rudder,

‐ Elevators.

ELECTRICAL BACKUP HYDRAULIC ACTUATOR (EBHA)

The EBHA is a combination of a conventional actuator and of an EHA. When hydraulic power is
available, the EBHA behaves like a conventional actuator. When hydraulic power is lost, the EBHA
behaves as an EHA. Each EBHA has:

‐ A servo valve for the hydraulic mode

‐ An electric hydraulic pump for the electric mode

‐ Its own hydraulic reservoir for the electric mode

Note: The reservoir is filled when hydraulic power is available. L1 ‐ A hydraulic actuator. L2 In
electric mode, the EBHA is isolated from the hydraulic system. L1 Only the pair of spoiler 5 is
fitted with an EBHA.

PITCH CONTROL

Two elevators and the trimmable horizontal stabilizer control the aircraft in pitch.

Note: In the event of an all engine flameout, all EHAs are powered via the 230 V AC EMER 2 busbar.

ELEVATORS

The maximum elevator deflection is 20 ° down and 30 ° up. L1 Each elevator has:

‐ One conventional actuator which is active (it commands the position of the surface)

‐ One EHA which is in damping mode (it follows the movement of the surface).

Both actuators can be simultaneously active, when a high surface deflection rate or a high force to
deflect the surface is required.

CONTROL

Only one flight control computer per elevator is active. The others are in stand-by. L2 When all
systems are operative:

‐ PRIM 1 controls the left-hand elevator

‐ PRIM 3 controls the right-hand elevator

If a PRIM or a hydraulic system fails, another flight control computer and power source will take
over, to ensure maximum elevator availability. L2 For example: for the left-hand elevator, if PRIM 1
or the green hydraulic system fails, PRIM 2 and the EHA on the AC EMER 2 busbar will takeover. L1
Both elevators remain available in backup control (Refer to DSC-27-10-40 Backup Control).

TRIMMABLE HORIZONTAL STABILIZER (THS)

The maximum THS deflection is between 0.8 ° and 13.7 ° nose up. L1 The THS has two electric motors,
a screwjack and a ball nut. In normal operations, one motor is active, the other one is in stand-by
mode. The active motor is switched after each flight to avoid motor wear. On ground, or in direct
law, the THS is directly controlled via the pitch trim switch. In flight, in normal and alternate
law, the THS is controlled by the flight control computers.

AUTOMATIC PITCH TRIM SETTING

The pitch trim is automatically set for takeoff:

‐ When the first engine is started, or

‐ When the flight crew arms the ground spoilers.

The pitch trim setting for takeoff is function of the takeoff CG.

The takeoff CG used for the pitch trim setting is provided by the FQMS, based on the ZFCG entered by
the flight crew in the FMS Fuel & Load page, and on the fuel distribution. It is displayed in the
permanent data of the system display. L2 Note: In the TAKEOFF panel of the FMS PERF page, the flight
crew enters the THS position for takeoff, based on the takeoff CG of the loadsheet. This input is
not used for automatic pitch trim setting. It is used to trigger the F/CTL PITCH TRIM/FMS/CG
DISAGREE caution, if necessary (For more information: Refer to PRO-ABN-F_CTL

F/CTL PITCH TRIM/FMS/CG DISAGREE).

During a touch and go, the pitch trim will automatically move to the takeoff position, based on the
aircraft CG. L3 The pitch trim will move when:

‐ Main landing gears are compressed for at least one second

‐ Aircraft speed is above 80 kt

‐ One of the following action is performed:

• Slats/flaps are moved

• Ground spoilers are disarmed

• At least one thrust levers is not at idle.

Note: After landing, the pitch trim will move to 0,8° (maintenance position) when the speed goes
below 30 kt.

CONTROL

Only one flight control computer is active. The other is in stand-by. L2 When all systems are
operative:

‐ PRIM 3 or PRIM 1 controls the pitch trim alternatively. The PRIM in control is switched after

each flight. L1 If a PRIM or a electric motor fails, another flight control computer and electric
motor will take over, to ensure maximum THS availability.

PITCH CONTROL

Two elevators and the trimmable horizontal stabilizer control the aircraft in pitch.

Note: In the event of an all engine flameout, all EHAs are powered via the 230 V AC EMER 2 busbar.

ELEVATORS

The maximum elevator deflection is 20 ° down and 30 ° up. L1 Each elevator has:

‐ One conventional actuator which is active (it commands the position of the surface)

‐ One EHA which is in damping mode (it follows the movement of the surface).

CONTROL

‐ PRIM 1 controls the left-hand elevator

‐ PRIM 3 controls the right-hand elevator

TRIMMABLE HORIZONTAL STABILIZER (THS)

AUTOMATIC PITCH TRIM SETTING

The pitch trim is automatically set for takeoff:

‐ When the first engine is started, or

‐ When the flight crew arms the ground spoilers.

The pitch trim setting for takeoff is function of the takeoff CG.

F/CTL PITCH TRIM/FMS/CG DISAGREE).

‐ Main landing gears are compressed for at least one second

‐ Aircraft speed is above 80 kt

‐ One of the following action is performed:

• Slats/flaps are moved

• Ground spoilers are disarmed

• At least one thrust levers is not at idle.

CONTROL

‐ PRIM 3 or PRIM 1 controls the pitch trim alternatively. The PRIM in control is switched after

ROLL CONTROL

On each wing, the 2 ailerons and the spoilers 3 to 7 control the aircraft in roll.

Note: In the event of an all engine flameout, all EHAs/EBHAs are powered via the 230 V AC EMER 1
busbar.

AILERONS

The maximum aileron deflection is 20 ° down and 30 ° up. L1 The outer ailerons have two conventional
actuators. Both actuators are active at the same time. The outer ailerons are not deflected up or
down above 250 kt. The inner ailerons have one conventional actuator and one EHA.

In normal operation, for inner ailerons:

‐ The conventional actuators are active (they command the position of the surface)

‐ The EHAs are in damping mode (they follow the movement of the surface).

CONTROL

On inner ailerons, only one flight control computer is active. The others are in standby. L2 When
all systems are operative PRIM 2 controls the yellow actuator. L1 On outer ailerons, two flight
control computers, PRIM 2 and PRIM 3, are active at the same time. L2 When all systems are
operative, PRIM 2 controls the green actuator and PRIM 3 controls the yellow actuator. L1 If a PRIM
or a hydraulic system fails, another flight control computer and power source will take over, to
ensure maximum aileron availability. L2 For example: for the outer ailerons, if PRIM 2 or the green
hydraulic system fails, PRIM 3 and the yellow hydraulic are still available. Only one actuator then
controls the outer ailerons. L1 The inner ailerons remain available in backup control (Refer to
DSC-27-10-40 Backup Control).

SPOILERS

The maximum spoiler deflection for roll control is 45 °. L1 Each spoiler has one actuator
(conventional or EBHA), and two flight control computers. L2 If the yellow hydraulic system is
available, the actuator of spoiler 5 operates as a conventional actuator. If the yellow hydraulic
system fails, the actuator of spoiler 5 operates as an EHA, powered by the 230 V AC EMER 1 busbar.
When failed, a spoiler is commanded in the anti-extension mode. When the anti-extension mode is
active, the affected spoiler:

‐ Remains retracted if it was retracted, or

‐ Remains in its position if it was extended below the balanced position, or

‐ Retracts to balanced position, if it was extended above its balanced position.

YAW CONTROL

RUDDER

One rudder controls the aircraft in yaw.

Note: In the event of an all engine flameout, the EHA is powered via the 230 V AC EMER 2 busbar. L1
The rudder has two conventional actuators and one EHA:

‐ Both conventional actuators are active at the same time (they command the position of the

surface)

‐ The EHA is in damping mode (it follows the movement of the surface).

If a conventional actuator fails, the EHA is activated and the remaining conventional actuator is in
damping mode. If a high rudder deflection rate is required, the remaining conventional actuator is
activated in addition to the EHA.

RUDDER TRAVEL LIMITATION

Maximum rudder deflection is limited as a function of the aircraft speed.

The maximum rudder deflection gradually reduce as the speed increases. In all cases, the available
rudder deflection provides sufficient yaw control within the entire flight envelope. This includes
failure cases and maximum asymmetric thrust. L3 In the case the three ADRs are failed, the maximum
rudder deflection is a function of the slats/flaps position. Maximum rudder deflection is available
when in CONF FULL.

RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN SIDESLIP/RUDDER DEFLECTION/RUDDER PEDAL TRAVEL

Regardless of the aircraft speed, and therefore regardless of the maximum rudder deflection, full
rudder pedal travel remains available. However, above 150 kt, maximum rudder deflection may be
achieved before maximum rudder pedal travel is reached.

CONTROL

Two flight control computers, PRIM 3 and PRIM 1 are active at the same time. L2 When all systems are
operative, PRIM 1 controls the green actuator and PRIM 3 controls the yellow actuator. For example:

‐ If PRIM 1 fails, SEC 1 will takeover for the green actuator

‐ If the yellow hydraulic system fails, the EHA is activated, controlled by PRIM 2. The green

hydraulic actuator activates in addition to the EHA if a high rudder deflection rate is required. L1
The rudder remains available in backup control (Refer to DSC-27-10-40 Backup Control).

RUDDER TRIM

Rudder trim is achieved via the Pedal Feel and Trim Unit (PFTU). The PFTU has two electric motors
(one controlled by SEC 2, the other controlled by SEC 3) to move the zero-force position of the
rudder pedals in accordance with the position of the rudder surface:

‐ For rudder trim in manual flight

Rudder trim is applied via the RUDDER TRIM selector on the pedestal.

‐ To reflect autopilot rudder trim orders, when the autopilot is engaged.

The autopilot orders are sent from the PRIMs, via the SECs. L1 Note: When the autopilot is engaged,
the RUDDER TRIM selector is not active. L2 The authority of the rudder trim is 85% of the maximum
rudder deflection.

AUTOMATIC RUDDER TRIM SETTING

The rudder trim is automatically set at 0 ° for takeoff:

‐ When the first engine is started, or

‐ When the flight crew arms the ground spoilers.

SPEEDBRAKES, GROUND SPOILER AND ADHF CONTROL

SPEED BRAKES CONTROL

All the spoilers can be used as speed brakes. L2 When a speed brake fails on one side, the symmetric
one on the other wing is inhibited. Spoilers 3 to 7 are also used for roll control. The roll control
function has priority over the speed brake function. When the sum of a roll order and a simultaneous
speed brake order on one surface is above the maximum deflection available in flight, the
symmetrical surface is retracted until the difference between the two surfaces is equal to the roll
order. L1 Each spoiler has one actuator (conventional or EBHA), and two flight control computers.
When all systems are operative the PRIMs control the spoilers. If a PRIM fails, a SEC will take
over, to ensure maximum spoiler availability.

EXTENSION

The flight crew controls the speed brakes with the SPEED BRAKE lever. L3 The maximum deflection for
spoilers is:

Spoiler Speed Brakes Maximum Deflection

1 15 ° 2 12 ° 3 20 ° 4 40 ° 5 40 ° 6 40 ° 7 30 ° L1 The speed brakes will automatically extend:

‐ In the case of VMO/MMO exceedance

For more information, Refer to DSC-22-27-20 High Speed Protection.

‐ If EMER DES mode automatically engages

For more information, Refer to DSC-22-FG-70-60-40 Engagement Conditions. L2 The speed brake
deflection is a function of

‐ The position of the SPEED BRAKE lever

When the SPEED BRAKE lever is at the 1/2 position, the speed brakes are 3/4 extended. L2 ‐ The
configuration of the slats/flaps L3 Speed brake deflection is reduced in CONF 1+F, 2, 3, and FULL.
L2 ‐ The load factor L3 Maximum deflection is reduced below 0.3 g, and above 1.7 g.

AUTOMATIC RETRACTION

If extended, the speed brakes automatically retract if:

‐ Alpha protection is activated, or

‐ A go-around is initiated.

Once retracted, the speed brakes remain retracted, even if the conditions have disappeared. To
extend the speed brakes again, the SPEED BRAKE lever must first be set to the retracted position for
at least 5 s. If automatically extended by the High Speed Protection, the speed brakes then
automatically retract, down to the SPEED BRAKE lever position, when the speed goes below VMO +2 kt.
For more information, Refer to DSC-22-27-20 High Speed Protection.

GROUND SPOILER CONTROL

All the spoilers and ailerons are also used as ground spoilers. L2 When a spoiler fails on one side,
the symmetric one on the other wing is inhibited.

ARMING

The flight crew arms the ground spoilers by pulling the SPEED BRAKE lever into the armed position.

EXTENSION

Landing

If all thrust levers are at idle and the ground spoilers armed, when at least one landing gear is on
ground, the ground spoilers partially extend. This partial extension, by decreasing the lift (lift
dumping), will ease the touchdown of the aircraft, and will, consequently, lead to the full
extension of the ground spoilers. L3 During a partial extension:

‐ The deflection of spoilers 1 and 2 is 10 °

‐ The deflection of spoilers 3 to 7 is 15 °

‐ The ailerons are not deflected.

The extension rate is 5 °/s. L1 The ground spoilers fully extend when two landing gears are on
ground. Note: If the ground spoilers are not armed, they will automatically extend when the
reversers are selected.

During a full extension:

‐ The deflection of spoilers 1 and 2 is 35 °

‐ The deflection of spoilers 3 to 7 is 50 °

‐ The deflection of the ailerons is 30 ° up.

The extension rate is 17 °/s. L2 The roll function of the spoilers is inhibited below 110 kt, when
the spoilers are used for the ground spoiler function. Roll control is available through ailerons.

Rejected Takeoff

The ground spoilers fully extend when the thrust levers are at idle and the speed is greater than 72
kt.

Note: If the ground spoilers are not armed, they will automatically extend when the reversers are
selected and the speed is greater than 72 kt. L3 During a full extension:

‐ The deflection of spoilers 1 and 2 is 35 °

‐ The deflection of spoilers 3 to 7 is 50 °

‐ The deflection of the ailerons is 30 °.

The extension rate is 17 °/s.

RETRACTION

The retraction occurs when one of the condition for ground spoilers selection is not valid anymore.
For example, the ground spoilers retract when the SPEED BRAKE lever is pushed down. L3 The
retraction rate is 17 °/s.

ADHF CONTROL

In configurations 1, 2, 3 and FULL, the Adaptive Droop Hinge Function (ADHF) improves the
aerodynamic performance of the wing by controlling the gap between the spoilers' trailing edge and
the flaps' leading edge. The spoilers are deflected downward to control this gap. L2 The SFCCs
permanently send the position of the flaps to the PRIMs. Then, the PRIMs control the downward
movement of the spoilers. ADHF control

In the case of failure of a spoiler, the affected spoiler remains in its position:

‐ In CONF 1, 2 and 3, the affected spoiler is pushed up by the associated flap surface during

flaps retraction

‐ In CONF FULL, the PRIMs inhibit flaps retraction.

COCKPIT VIEW

AUDIO INDICATORS

Audio Indicator Condition or Cause Duration Dual Input (Synthetic Voice) Both flight crew members
Sounds one time. simultaneously move the sidesticks. Priority Left (Synthetic voice) The CAPT
presses the sidestick pb. Sounds one time. Priority Right (Synthetic voice) The F/O presses the
sidestick pb. Sounds one time.

F/CTL PANELS

‐ F/CTL SEC 1(2)(3) FAULT(Refer to PRO-ABN-F_CTL F/CTL SEC

The FAULT light goes off, when the flight crew sets the pb-sw to

Indicates that more information is available on the F/CTL SD MORE page. In order to display the
F/CTL SD MORE page, the flight crew presses the MORE pb on the ECP.

FLIGHT CONTROL COMPUTERS

SLATS/FLAPS COMPUTERS

The slats/flaps surfaces no longer operate

‐ Both slats(flaps) systems are failed, or

‐ The slats(flaps) are jammed, or

‐ The WTBs lock the slats(flaps).

SLATS/FLAPS STATUS

The slats/flaps surfaces operate normally.

The slats surfaces no longer operate:

‐ Both slats systems are failed, or

‐ The slats are jammed, or

‐ The WTBs lock the slats, or

‐ There is a combination of the slats system failure and the slats motor failure.

‐ Both flaps systems are failed, or

‐ The flaps are jammed, or

‐ The WTBs lock the flaps.

The inner flaps surfaces no longer operate. The ADGBs still control the outer flaps surfaces:

‐ The inner flaps actuators are failed, or

‐ The power supply of the inner flaps actuators is failed.

BKUP CTL ACTIVE INDICATION

The backup control is active.

RUDDER ACTUATORS

RUDDER POSITION

RUDDER TRIM POSITION

ELEVATOR POSITION

ELEVATOR / AILERON ACTUATORS

AILERON POSITION

‐ The aircraft is in normal law, and

‐ The roll order commanded by the PRIM to compensate the imbalance is above 16 °,

and

‐ The roll order commanded by the pilot through the sidestick is below 10 °.

The white round symbol indicates the neutral position (aileron droop). The aileron droop occurs:

‐ When the flaps are extended for lift augmentation, or

‐ In cruise for performance optimization.

SPOILER POSITION

‐ The flaps are extended

‐ The associated spoiler is deflected downward.

‐ The flaps are extended

‐ The associated spoiler is extended.

‐ The aircraft is in normal law, and

‐ The roll order commanded by the PRIM to compensate the imbalance is above 16 °,

and

‐ The roll order commanded by the pilot through the sidestick is below 10 °.

‐ The flaps are retracted

‐ The associated spoiler is not extended.

‐ The flaps are retracted

‐ The associated spoiler is extended.

‐ The aircraft is in normal law, and

‐ The roll order commanded by the PRIM to compensate the imbalance is above 16 °,

and

‐ The roll order commanded by the pilot through the sidestick is below 10 °.

SLATS/FLAPS MOTORS

PITCH TRIM POSITION

PITCH TRIM INDICATION

Normal operation.

PITCH TRIM ACTUATORS

F/CTL MESSAGE ON FMA

Message on FMA

‐ F/CTL DIRECT LAW (PROT LOST)Refer to

procedure, or

For more information on the reconfiguration to direct law, Refer to Direct Law. The message pulses
for 9 s then remains steady.

PITCH TRIM DISPLAY

The pitch trim display is displayed on ground, before takeoff and after landing. L3 ‐ After takeoff,
it disappears when the aircraft is 50 ft above the runway

‐ After landing, it is displayed when the aircraft speed is below 30 kt.

For touch and go, it will be displayed as soon as one of the following occurs:

‐ The engine levers are moved out of idle, or

‐ Spoilers are disarmed, or

‐ Flaps are retracted one step, or

‐ The flight crew presses the PITCH TRIM sw.

Pitch Trim Display

The following are displayed:

‐ The Green Band

The green band is the range of pitch trim positions for which takeoff has been certified, whatever
the aircraft's CG inside the takeoff envelope. The green band ranges from 20 % to 42.4 % L2 This
corresponds to a pitch trim position from 1 ° to 9 ° Nose Up. L1 ‐ The aircraft GWCG L2 The GWCG is
computed by the FQMS, based on the ZFW and ZFCG entered by the crew, and the FOB. L1 ‐ The position
of the pitch trim, and the associated takeoff CG. L2 In order to always have the same aircraft
behavior at rotation, there is an optimum pitch trim setting for each takeoff CG. This optimum pitch
trim setting for takeoff is provided in the following graphic.

PITCH TRIM SETTING FOR TAKEOFF

The pitch trim is automatically set for takeoff, based on the aircraft's CG (For more information:
Refer to DSC-27-10-10 Pitch control). The pitch trim display enables to check the correct setting of
the pitch trim, prior to takeoff.

PITCH TRIM SETTING AT TAKEOFF TARGET

The pitch trim setting for takeoff is correct. L2 The position of the pitch trim is within 1.5 ° of
the optimum pitch trim position for takeoff for the current aircraft GWCG.

PITCH TRIM NOT OPTIMUM

PITCH TRIM OUT OF THE GREEN BAND

PITCH TRIM AFTER LANDING

PITCH TRIM DISPLAY

‐ After landing, it is displayed when the aircraft speed is below 30 kt.

For touch and go, it will be displayed as soon as one of the following occurs:

‐ The engine levers are moved out of idle, or

‐ Spoilers are disarmed, or

‐ Flaps are retracted one step, or

‐ The flight crew presses the PITCH TRIM sw.

Pitch Trim Display

The following are displayed:

‐ The Green Band

The green band is the range of pitch trim positions for which takeoff has been certified, whatever
the aircraft's CG inside the takeoff envelope. The green band ranges from 21.5 % to 41.1 % L2 This
corresponds to a pitch trim position from 1 ° to 7.4 ° Nose Up. L1 ‐ The aircraft GWCG L2 The GWCG
is computed by the FQMS, based on the ZFW and ZFCG entered by the crew, and the FOB. L1 ‐ The
position of the pitch trim, and the associated takeoff CG. L2 In order to always have the same
aircraft behavior at rotation, there is an optimum pitch trim setting for each takeoff CG. This
optimum pitch trim setting for takeoff is provided in the following graphic.

PITCH TRIM SETTING FOR TAKEOFF

PITCH TRIM SETTING AT TAKEOFF TARGET

PITCH TRIM NOT OPTIMUM

PITCH TRIM OUT OF THE GREEN BAND

PITCH TRIM AFTER LANDING

PITCH TRIM SW

PITCH TRIM sw Controls the position of the Trimmable Horizontal Stabilizer (THS). L3 It moves the
THS at the following speed:

‐ In clean configuration : 0.3 °/s

‐ With slats/flaps extended : 0.8 °/s

‐ In the case of emergency : 0.1 °/s

electrical configuration L1 The PITCH TRIM sw is composed of two switches, which are spring loaded
to neutral. In order to move the pitch trim, both switches must be pressed simultaneously. On
ground, the PITCH TRIM sw has priority over the automatic takeoff trim setting. The PITCH TRIM sw is
inhibited in flight, except in direct law.

In direct law, the auto trim function is lost. The USE MAN PITCH TRIM message is displayed on the

RUDDER TRIM PANEL

RUDDER TRIM Panel

RUDDER TRIM SELECTOR

Controls the rudder trim position. L3 It moves the neutral point of the artificial feel by an
equivalent of:

‐ In clean configuration : 0.5 °/s of rudder travel for quick inputs

1.5 °/s for inputs longer than 1.5 s

‐ With slats/flaps extended : 1.5 °/s of rudder travel for quick inputs

3 °/s for inputs longer than 1.5 s L1 Note: The RUDDER TRIM selector is not active with the
autopilot engaged. RESET pb Resets the rudder trim position. L2 When pressed, the rudder trim
position is ordered to zero at 3 °/s. L1 Note: The RESET pb is not active with the autopilot
engaged.

SIDESTICKS

Sidestick

The sidesticks are springloaded to neutral. They are not mechanically linked, and do not receive
feedback from the flight control surfaces. When the autopilot is engaged, the sidesticks are locked
in the neutral position. If a flight crewmember applies a force above a given threshold:

‐ The sidesticks unlock

‐ The autopilot disengages

‐ The AUTO FLT AP OFF alert triggers.

The autopilot disengages when a pilot applies a force of more than 5 daN in pitch, or 3.5 daN in
roll. L1 Note: This is not the recommended method for autopilot disengagement. For more information,
Refer to DSC-22-FG-40-30 Manual Disengagement.

Each sidestick has two controls:

‐ The Radio Push To Talk switch

‐ The sidestick pb, for autopilot disengagement, or sidestick priority.

SIDESTICK PRIORITY LOGIC

At all times, only one flight crew member should fly the aircraft. However, if both flight crew
members use their sidesticks simultaneously, their orders are algebraically added. L2 The flight
control laws limit the combined order to the equivalent of the full deflection of one sidestick. L1
In this case a DUAL INPUT callout is triggered. A flight crew member can deactivate the other
sidestick and take full control, by pressing and keeping pressed the sidestick pb. To deactivate the
other sidestick, the flight crewmember must press their sidestick pb for 40 s. The other sidestick
is permanently deactivated, until any flight crewmember presses their sidestick pb. If both flight
crew members press their sidestick pb, the last pilot to press gets the priority. L2 If one
sidestick was deactivated on ground, the CONFIG L(R) SIDESTICK FAULT (BY TAKE-OVER) alert is
triggered at takeoff power application, or during the TO CONFIG test. L1 For more information: Refer
to DSC-27-10-20 SIDESTICK PRIORITY light

ARM REST

The armrest on the sidestick side of the Captain and F/O seats are adjustable. Correctly adjusting
the seat eases the handling of the sidestick. For information on how to adjust the armrest: Refer to
DSC-25-10 Flight Crew Seats.

SIDESTICK INDICATION ON PFD

On ground, after the first engine start, the sidestick position indication appears on both PFDs. It
corresponds to the sum of both sidestick orders, except if a sidestick has taken the priority. The
indication disappears after liftoff.

SIDESTICK PRIORITY LIGHT

SIDESTICK PRIORITY

No dual input The SIDESTICK PRIORITY lights are on the glareshield. There is no dual input, and no
flight crewmember presses their sidestick pb.

DUAL INPUT

Both flight crewmembers simultaneously move their sidesticks. The orders of both sidesticks are
algebraically added. The CAPT and F/O lights flash, and the DUAL INPUT callout is triggered. Dual
Input (Synthetic voice)

PRIORITY LEFT

The Captain presses their sidestick pb. The PRIORITY LEFT callout is triggered. Priority Left
(Synthetic voice) The CAPT light comes on, only if the First Officer moves their sidestick.

PRIORITY RIGHT

The First Officer presses their sidestick pb. The PRIORITY RIGHT callout is triggered. Priority
Right (Synthetic voice) The F/O light comes on, only if the Captain moves their sidestick.

SPEED BRAKE LEVER

SPEED BRAKE Lever

The Speed Brake lever:

‐ Controls position of the speed brakes

The flight crew can set any intermediate position from RETracted to FULL. The flight crew must push
the lever down to set it at the required position. The flight crew can manually engage the EMER DES
mode, if previously armed. Refer to DSC-22-FG-70-60-40 Engagement Conditions. Speed Brakes 3/4
EXTENDED

‐ Arms the ground spoilers

When the lever is in GND SPLRS ARMED position, the spoilers automatically extend at landing or in
the case of a rejected takeoff. To arm the ground spoilers, the flight crew must pull the lever when
it is in the RET position. A white band appears around the base of the speed brake lever, to
indicate that the spoilers are armed.

Ground Spoilers Armed

SLATS/FLAPS DISPLAY

SPOILERS INDICATIONS ON THE SLATS/FLAPS DISPLAY

For slats/flaps position information, Refer to DSC-27-20-30 Slats/Flaps Display. For landing gear
position information, Refer to DSC-32-10-20 Slats/Flaps Display. The SPEED BRAKE lever is in the RET
position.

The SPEED BRAKE lever is in the 1/2 position. The white speed brake scale is displayed as soon as
the SPEED BRAKE lever is moved out of the retracted position.

‐ The first line of the scale corresponds to the 1/2 position

‐ The second line of the scale represents the FULL position.

‐ In cruise, the speed brakes have been extended for 50 s and at least

one engine is not at idle

‐ Below 800 ft, the speed brakes have been extended more than 5 s.

RUDDER TRIM INDICATION ON THE SLATS/FLAPS DISPLAY

The rudder trim position appears:

‐ When the flight crews moves the rudder trim position via the RUDDER TRIM selector, or

‐ When the flight crew presses the RESET pb, or

Note: The indication remains displayed 10 s after the 0 ° trim position is reached. L1 ‐ In the case
of failure of one engine, or L2 Note: The indication remains displayed for the remainder of the
flight.

‐ In flight, or on ground with a speed above 65 kt and when the rudder trim position exceeds +/-1 °,
  or L2 Note: The indication remains displayed 10 s after the position goes below +/-1 °. L1 ‐ On
  ground with a speed below 65 kt, and when the rudder trim position exceeds +/-0.4 °. L2 Note: The
  indication remains displayed until the position goes below +/-0.4 °. L1 : The blue diamond
  represents the position of the rudder trim. : The rudder trim is failed.

MEMO

GND SPLRs ARMED The ground spoilers are armed. Appears on the WD.

Flight Phase Inhibition:

Flight Phase Inhibition

SPD BRK AUTO EXT The speed brakes have extended automatically after one of the following conditions:

‐ Activation of the high speed protection

‐ Automatic engagement of the EMER DES mode.

Appears on the PFD and on the WD.

Flight Phase Inhibition:

Flight Phase Inhibition

GENERAL

The normal flight control laws provide aircraft control on the 3 axis. The characteristics of the
normal law vary with the flight phase:

‐ On ground

‐ In flight

‐ During flare.

Flight to Ground Transition The normal law also provides the following flight envelope protections:

‐ Load factor protection (For more information: Refer to DSC-22-27-20 Load Factor Protection)

‐ Pitch attitude protection (For more information: Refer to DSC-22-27-20 Pitch Attitude Protection)

‐ Angle of attack protection (For more information: Refer to DSC-22-27-20 High Angle of Attack

Protection)

‐ High speed protection (For more information: Refer to DSC-22-27-20 High Speed Protection)

‐ Bank angle protection (For more information: Refer to DSC-22-27-20 Bank Angle Protection).

The normal law also provides structural load alleviation, both in maneuver and in turbulence (Refer
to DSC-27-10-30 Load Alleviation Function).

PFD DISPLAY

PITCH CONTROL

ROTATION LAW

The objective of the rotation law is to provide an homogeneous rotation for all possible weight, CG
and configurations, while minimizing the risk of a tail strike. The rotation law is a pitch rate
demand control law, providing tail strike protection. L2 The flight crew can override the tail
strike protection. The rotation law depends on:

‐ The pitch rate

‐ The tail clearance

‐ The sidestick position.

The rotation law is active on ground.

FLIGHT LAW

The normal law in flight is a load factor demand law with auto trim and full flight envelope
protection. In manual flight, the normal law provides elevator and pitch trim control from the
sidesticks, to achieve a load factor which is a function of the sidestick deflection, independent of
the aircraft speed. With the sidestick at neutral and the wings level, the flight control system
maintains 1g in pitch, corrected for pitch attitude. There is no need for the pilot to trim with
speed and configuration changes. In normal turns (up to 33° of bank), no pitch correction is
required once the turn is established.

The normal flight law is available in flight from 5 s after liftoff, to below 100 ft RA during the
approach. (The normal flight law is gradually phased-in during 5 s, 5 s after liftoff). The
transition to the flight law is reduced to 1 s, if the angle of attack protection, or the pitch
attitude protection is active.

FLARE + DEROTATION LAW

The objective of the flare law is to:

‐ Provide a conventional aircraft behavior during the flare

‐ Enable a precise control of the vertical speed and touchdown point

‐ Provide a smooth derotation and avoid hard nose wheel touchdown.

The flare law is a direct law without autotrim, with some damping provided by a pitch rate feedback.
The flare law provides full elevator authority. The flare law is active below 100 ft RA. L3 Note: If
RA are detected lost, the flare law is active when the gear is down.

LATERAL CONTROL

GROUND LAW

The objective of the lateral ground law is to facilitate aircraft handling on ground. The lateral
ground law is a full authority control law in roll and yaw, with some yaw damping. However, for
small sidestick deflections, the lateral ground law helps the pilot to keep a small bank angle (less
than 2 °), using only the ailerons. In particular, when the sidestick is at neutral, the law will
aim to keep the wings level. L2 When rudder pedal deflection is close to maximum, yaw damping is
removed. L1 The ground law is gradually phased in during 2 s after touchdown and phased out 2 s
after lift off.

ENGINE FAILURE AT TAKEOFF

In the case of an engine failure during takeoff, the ailerons and spoiler 3 can be deflected on the
wing opposite to the failed engine in order to increase yaw efficiency. Note: Increasing yaw
efficiency in the case of an engine failure on ground, reduces the VMCG, and therefore improves the
takeoff performance. The ailerons and spoiler deflection is proportional to the rudder input. L2 The
ailerons and spoiler will be deflected on the remaining engine side, when:

‐ The aircraft is on ground

‐ The speed is above 60 kt

‐ The rudder pedal deflection is more than 2/3 of the maximum rudder pedal deflection (23.1 °).

Engine failure at takeoff The inner aileron are deflected downwards. The outer aileron are deflected
upwards. When the rudder reaches its full deflection (35 °)

‐ The outer aileron reaches its full upwards deflection (20 °)

‐ The inner aileron reaches its full downwards deflection (20 °)

‐ Spoiler 3 reaches 40 ° upwards

An automatic rudder input can also be transiently added to pilot input in order to minimize the
effect of the engine failure.

The automatic rudder input is available when:

‐ The speed is above 100 kt

‐ The aircraft lateral acceleration is above a defined threshold and is in the same direction as

thrust asymmetry. Note: The automatic rudder input is proportional to the thrust asymmetry and is
adapted to the actual situation. As an example, a large input will be applied for a light aircraft
with high thrust close to VMCG. On the opposite, small or no automatic rudder input will be applied
for a heavy aircraft with low thrust or at high speed, which ensures that the function will not hide
the effect of the engine failure to the flight crew.

RUDDER DEFLECTION WITH DIFFERENTIAL BRAKING

In order to have adequate directional control in the case of a rudder pedal fault or jammed rudder
pedals, differential braking controls the rudder and nosewheel steering. L3 Differential braking
control of the rudder is available when:

‐ The aircraft is on ground

‐ The autopilot is not engaged

‐ The speed is above 50 kt.

When the differential braking is more than 50%, the PRIMs order a rudder deflection, in addition to
the brake pedals order. L3 Note: The differential braking rudder deflection order is limited when
the rudder pedals are not at 0 °.

FLIGHT LAW

The normal lateral law in flight:

‐ Is a roll rate demand law, by using the sidesticks

‐ Is a sideslip demand law, by using the rudder pedals.

The normal lateral law provides:

‐ Full flight envelope protection (maximum bank and sideslip angles)

‐ Turn coordination, and dutch roll damping.

The flight law is available in flight, gradually phased-in during 2 s after liftoff.

ROLL RATE DEMAND

In manual flight, the normal law provides aileron and spoiler control from the sidesticks, to
achieve a roll rate which is proportional to the sidestick deflection, independent of the aircraft
speed.

With a full sidestick deflection, the maximum achievable roll rate is 15 °/s. The maximum roll rate
can be limited:

‐ To 7.5 °/s, if angle of attack protection is active

‐ Between 7.5 °/s and 15 °/s, in case of an engine failure, depending on the thrust asymmetry.

Bank Angle Protection

When the bank angle is less than 33 °, the normal law:

‐ Maintains a constant bank angle when the sidestick is at neutral (neutral spiral stability)

‐ Provides automatic pitch trim (turn compensation).

When the bank angle is above 33 °,

‐ The bank angle returns to 33 ° if the sidestick is at neutral (positive spiral stability is
  restored)

‐ Automatic pitch trim is not available (aft pressure on the sidestick is needed to maintain

altitude). The maximum achievable bank angle is:

‐ 67 ° in clean configuration

‐ 60 ° in high lift configurations

‐ 45 ° when the nose down pitch attitude protection is active

‐ 45 ° when the high speed protection is active (in this case, the bank angle returns to 0 when

the sidestick is at neutral)

‐ Limited by the maximum achievable load factor, when angle of attack protection is active (the

maximum achievable bank angle is above 45 °).

SIDESLIP DEMAND

In manual flight, the normal law provides rudder control from the rudder pedals, to achieve a
sideslip which is proportional to the pedal deflection, independent of the aircraft speed. For a
given sideslip angle, the aircraft will stabilize at a given roll angle. L2 Below 100 ft, the
aircraft will try to maintain wings level, independently of sideslip demand. This is to assist pilot
control in roll during the decrab phase in the case of crosswind conditions. L1 The sideslip is
limited by the flight control computers. L2 The maximum sideslip is between:

‐ 2 ° at VMO

‐ 15 ° in CONF 3 and CONF FULL, at approach speed.

Note: When maximum sideslip is reached, pushing any further on the rudder pedals will have no
effect.

Engine Failure

In case of an engine failure, the lateral law provides sideslip and bank angle with a slowly
diverging heading, as with a conventional aircraft. During takeoff, the sideslip display is modified
to ensure optimum takeoff performance. By centering the blue Beta target, the total aircraft drag is
minimized. It results in a compromise between the drag produced by the flight control surfaces
deflection and the drag produced by the sideslip of the airframe. L2 Once the aircraft is in clean
configuration with the autopilot engaged, the rudder pedals are automatically commanded to the
neutral position.

LOAD ALLEVIATION FUNCTION

The aim of the Load Alleviation Function (LAF) is to reduce the fatigue and static loads on the
wing. The LAF is part of the normal pitch law. The LAF is available in normal law and can also be
available in alternate law. The LAF includes:

‐ The Maneuver Load Alleviation (MLA)

‐ The Gust Load Alleviation (GLA)

‐ The Differential Flaps Setting (DFS) for loads reductions purposes.

MANEUVER LOAD ALLEVIATION

The MLA reduces the loads during maneuvers. The MLA modifies the spanwise lift distribution which
reduces the wing bending moment. This is done by symmetrically deflecting the ailerons and/or the
spoilers. The deflection of the ailerons and spoilers depends on the aircraft configuration, speed
and the load factor. The Flight crew roll orders have priority on MLA. L2 In clean configuration,
the MLA is active above 200 kt:

‐ For a positive load factor above 1.7 g: only the ailerons are deflected upwards to a maximum of

20 °

‐ For a negative load factor below -0.5 g: ailerons are deflected downwards and spoilers upwards.

The spoilers and outboard ailerons can be deflected to a maximum of 20 ° and the inboard ailerons to
a maximum of 10 °. In configuration 1, only the ailerons are deflected upwards to a maximum of 15 °
for a positive load factor above 1.6 g. In configurations 1+F, 2, 3 only the ailerons are deflected
upwards to a maximum of 5 ° for a positive load factor above 1.6 g. L1 The MLA is inhibited in
configuration FULL. L2 In the case of one outboard aileron with one actuator inoperative (simplex
mode):

‐ The ailerons are deflected to a maximum of 20 ° in clean configuration, 15 ° in configuration 1

and 5 ° in configurations 1+F, 2 and 3

‐ The positive load factor threshold is reduced down to 1.4 g in all configurations.

GUST LOAD ALLEVIATION

The GLA reduces the loads in the case of turbulence. The GLA reduces the lift of the outer wing.
This is done by symmetrically deflecting the ailerons upwards. The induced pitch effect is
compensated with the elevators.

The Flight crew roll orders have priority on GLA. L2 The GLA is active in clean configuration above
210 kt. The deflection of the ailerons depends on the variation of the angle of attack during the
last 5 s. The ailerons can be deflected up to a maximum of 12 ° upwards.

DIFFERENTIAL FLAPS SETTINGS FOR LOAD ALLEVIATION

The DFS modifies the spanwise lift distribution which reduces the wing bending moment for high GW.
This is done by deflecting inner flaps down to a maximum of 2 °. L2 The DFS for load alleviation is
available:

‐ For GW above MTOW - 30 t (66 klb)

‐ In clean configuration

‐ In normal law.

LOAD ALLEVIATION FUNCTION

‐ The Maneuver Load Alleviation (MLA)

‐ The Gust Load Alleviation (GLA).

MANEUVER LOAD ALLEVIATION

‐ For a positive load factor above 1.6 g:

• The ailerons are deflected upwards to a maximum of 20 °

• The spoilers can be deflected upwards to a maximum of 20 ° only in the case of overspeed.

‐ For a negative load factor below -0.5 g:

• The inboard ailerons are deflected downwards to a maximum of 10 °

• The outboard ailerons are deflected downwards to a maximum of 20 °

• The spoilers are deflected upwards to a maximum of 20 °.

In configurations 1, 2 and 3, only the ailerons are deflected upwards to a maximum of 15 ° for a
positive load factor above 1.6 g. L1 The MLA is inhibited in configuration FULL. L2 In the case of
one outboard aileron with one actuator inoperative (simplex mode):

‐ The ailerons are deflected to a maximum of 20 ° in clean configuration, 15 ° in configuration 1

and 5 ° in configurations 1+F, 2 and 3

‐ The positive load factor threshold is reduced down to 1.4 g in all configurations.

GUST LOAD ALLEVIATION

The GLA reduces the loads in the case of turbulence. The GLA reduces the lift of the outer wing.
This is done by symmetrically deflecting the ailerons upwards. The induced pitch effect is
compensated with the elevators. The Flight crew roll orders have priority on GLA. L2 The GLA is
active in clean configuration above 210 kt. The deflection of the ailerons depends on the variation
of the angle of attack during the last 5 s. The ailerons are deflected upwards to a maximum of 12 °.

RECONFIGURATION CONTROL LAWS

A single failure cannot lead to the loss of the normal flight control law. However, a combination of
failures may result in a degradation of the flight control laws. The level of degradation will
depend on the severity of the failures. This degradation of the flight control laws is referred to
as reconfiguration. There are two reconfiguration levels:

‐ Alternate law (Refer to DSC-27-10-40 Alternate Law)

‐ Direct law (Refer to DSC-27-10-40 Direct Law).

F/CTL Law Ops impact Failure Leading to Reconfiguration

F/CTL SLAT SYS 1+2 FAULT

Max Speed: F/CTL FLAP SYS 1+2 FAULT Depending on the F/CTL INR FLAPS FAULT position of flaps/slats
F/CTL SLATS LOCKED

F/CTL FLAPS LOCKED

F/CTL L(R) INR(OUTR) AILERON FAULT

(if two ailerons are failed) NAV RA SYS A+B+C FAULT (during the approach phase)(1)

F/CTL RUDDER FAULT

ALTERNATE LAW

F/CTL L(R) ELEVATOR FAULT

F/CTL PART SPLRS FAULT

Max Speed: 310 kt (if more than three pairs of roll spoilers are failed)

F/CTL MOST SPLRS FAULT

F/CTL STABILIZER FAULT

NAV ADR 1+2+3 FAULT

HYD G+Y SYS PRESS LO

ENG ALL ENGINES FAILURE

ELEC EMER CONFIG

F/CTL Law Ops impact Failure Leading to Reconfiguration

F/CTL PRIM 1 FAULT

and

F/CTL PRIM 2 FAULT

and

F/CTL PRIM 3 FAULT

F/CTL SLAT SYS 1+2 FAULT

and

F/CTL FLAP SYS 1+2 FAULT

and The slats and flaps are indicated amber XX on the slats/flaps display Max Speed: and DIRECT LAW
310 kt/M .86 The aircraft is below 22 000 ft. APs and FDs not F/CTL L ELEVATOR FAULT available and

F/CTL R ELEVATOR FAULT

Loss of F/CTL Redundancy (For example when it remains less than one inner(outer) aileron and two
roll spoilers available on each wing). Loss of ground detection information.

NAV AOA DISAGREE

Loss of the three IRs. ZFW/ZFWCG not inserted in FMS before engine start, or inserted less than 10
min after the first engine shutdown. Accuracy of GW and CG degraded (above 4 %) on ground. (1) In
the case of a triple RA failure, the reversion to ALTN law occurs during the approach phase, when
the L/G is down and the AP is off. The auto trim function is lost and the USE MAN PITCH TRIM message
is displayed on the PFD. In addition, the following enable aircraft control, in exceptional
conditions:

‐ Abnormal attitude law, when the aircraft is far outside of the protected envelope (Refer to

DSC-27-10-40 Abnormal Attitude Law)

‐ Electrical Backup mode, when all flight control computers are lost (Refer to DSC-27-10-40 Backup

Control).

ALTERNATE LAW

In alternate law the pitch, roll and yaw controls are similar to controls in normal law. All
protections are indicated as lost. However, protections are still available but, depending on the
failure, may not be as efficient as in normal laws.

The flight crew should get prepared to experience an aircraft response similar to normal law when
approaching flight envelope limits. As protections may not be as efficient as in normal laws, the
flight crew must fly the aircraft more attentively to avoid any inadvertent limit exceedance. The
OVERSPEED and STALL warnings remain available. The speed is limited to 310 kt to maintain an
adequate overspeed margin.

PFD DISPLAY

PFD Display in Alternate Law

DIRECT LAW

PFD DISPLAY

PFD Display in Direct Law

PITCH CONTROL

In direct law, there is a direct relationship between the sidestick position and the elevator
position. There is no autotrim. Pitch trim is adjusted via the PITCH TRIM sw. The speed is limited
to:

‐ 310 kt, to maintain an adequate overspeed margin

‐ M .86, to maintain an adequate pitch stability.

LATERAL CONTROL

The lateral control is in direct law:

‐ Roll direct law.

There is a direct relationship between the sidestick position and the aileron and spoiler position.
If all the roll surfaces are available (i.e. no hydraulic failure), the maximum achievable roll rate
is higher than in normal law. L1 ‐ Yaw direct law L2 There is a direct relationship between the
rudder pedal position and the rudder position. The yaw direct law provides limited dutch roll
damping and turn coordination.

PROTECTIONS

All protections are lost. The OVERSPEED and STALL warnings remain available.

ABNORMAL ATTITUDE LAW

If for any reason the aircraft goes far outside the normal flight envelope and reaches an extreme
attitude, the flight control law will be modified. The abnormal attitude law will engage and provide
the PF with maximum efficiency to recover normal attitude. The abnormal attitude law engages when
one of the following values is reached:

‐ Pitch attitude:

• If at least two air data computers are valid and consistent: Pitch attitude above 50 ° nose up or

below 30 ° nose down

• In all other cases: Pitch attitude above 40 ° nose up or below 20 ° nose down.

‐ Bank angle above 120 °

‐ Angle-of-attack above 37.5 °

‐ Speed above 420 kt, or below 70 kt

‐ Mach above 0.98, or below 0.11.

When abnormal attitude law engages:

‐ The pitch direct law is active with increased authority

‐ The roll direct law is active

‐ The yaw direct law is active.

When the aircraft attitude returns within the normal flight envelope, the abnormal attitude law
disengages and the alternate law engages with pitch normal law, roll normal law, and yaw normal law
for the remainder of the flight.

BACKUP CONTROL

In the unlikely event of the loss of all flight control computers (PRIMs and SECs), the backup
control provides control and stability of the aircraft. The backup control controls the following
surfaces:

‐ Inner ailerons

‐ Rudder

‐ Elevators.

When the backup control is active, the flight crew controls the aircraft via:

‐ The sidesticks

‐ The rudder pedals

‐ The pitch trim switch.

When the backup control is active, the control of the stabilizer is lost. The pitch trim switch
remains available and controls the elevators.

The backup control has:

‐ One backup Power Supply (BPS)

The BPS is electrical generator, supplied by the yellow hydraulic system. The BPS starts to operate
when PRIM 2 and SEC 2 are failed or no longer supplied.

‐ One Backup Control Module (BCM).

The BCM is powered by the BPS. It starts to operate when all flight control computers are lost.

Backup Control
